See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329760910
Capturing Architectural Requirements
Article · November 2001
CITATIONS
34
READS
4,904
1 author:
Peter Eeles
36 PUBLICATIONS   278 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Peter Eeles on 18 December 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Capturing Architectural Requirements
by Peter Eeles
Rational Services Organization, UK
Capturing requirements is difficult.
Capturing architecturally significant
requirements is particularly difficult.
This article discusses the root causes
of this difficulty, and suggests a
systematic approach to capturing
architectural requirements to ensure
that these elusive, and yet extremely
important, system specifications are
not overlooked.
What Is an Architectural
Requirement?
Because this article focuses on an approach to gathering requirements of
particular significance to the architecture of a system1, let's start with the
definition of an architectural requirement.
The Rational Unified Process® (RUP®) gives the following definition for
any requirement:
A requirement describes a condition or capability to which a
system must conform; either derived directly from user needs,
or stated in a contract, standard, specification, or other formally
imposed document.
An architectural requirement, in turn, is any requirement that is
architecturally significant, whether this significance be implicit or explicit.
Implicit architectural requirements are those requirements that have
particular attributes. For example, any high-risk, high-priority, or lowstability requirement could be considered to be architecturally significant.
However, this article will focus primarily on explicit requirements, which
are often technical in nature. The following are examples of explicit
architectural requirements:
● The product will be localized (support multiple human languages).
● The persistence will be handled by a relational database.
● The database will be Oracle 8i.
● The system will run seven days a week, twenty-four hours per day.
● An online help system is required.
● All presentation logic will be written in Visual Basic.
As you may notice, these requirements are extremely mixed. Some are
functional, some non-functional; some are independent of technical
mechanisms, others are not. What we need is a systematic approach that
provides a framework for classifying architectural requirements, which
ensures that valuable statements such as those listed above are not
overlooked.
The FURPS+ System for Classifying Requirements
One such classification system was devised by Robert Grady at HewlettPackard.2 It goes by the acronym FURPS+ which represents:
● Functionality
● Usability
● Reliability
● Performance
● Supportability
The "+" in FURPS+ also helps us to remember concerns such as:
● Design requirements
● Implementation requirements
● Interface requirements
● Physical requirements
Let's look at each category in detail.
Functional Requirements
These requirements generally represent the main product features. In a
warehouse application, we might have requirements pertaining to order
processing or stock control, for example. However, functional
requirements are not always domain-specific. Providing printing capability
is a functional requirement of particular significance to architecture, for
example.
Table 1 lists additional functional requirements that might be considered.
Table 1: Architecturally Significant Functional Requirements
Function Description
Auditing Provide audit trails of system execution.
Licensing Provide services for tracking, acquiring, installing,
and monitoring license usage.
Localization Provide facilities for supporting multiple human
languages.
Mail Provide services that allow applications to send and
receive mail.
Online help Provide online help capability.
Printing Provide facilities for printing.
Reporting Provide reporting facilities.
Security Provide services to protect access to certain
resources or information.
System management Provide services that facilitate management of
applications in a distributed environment.
Workflow Provide support for moving documents and other
work items, including review and approval cycles.
Usability, Reliability, Performance, and Supportability
Requirements
The remaining "URPS" categories describe non-functional requirements
that are generally architecturally significant.
● Usability is concerned with characteristics such as aesthetics and
consistency in the user interface.
● Reliability is concerned with characteristics such as availability (the
amount of system "up time"), accuracy of system calculations, and
the system's ability to recover from failure.
● Performance is concerned with characteristics such as throughput,
response time, recovery time, start-up time, and shutdown time.
● Supportability is concerned with characteristics such as testability,
adaptability, maintainability, compatibility, configurability,
installability, scalability, and localizability.
Design, Implementation, Interface, and Physical
Requirements
The "+" in the FURPS+ acronym is used to identify additional categories
that generally represent constraints.
● A design requirement, often called a design constraint, specifies or
constrains the options for designing a system. For example, if you
specify that a relational database is required, that's a design
constraint.
● An implementation requirement specifies or constrains the coding or
construction of a system. Examples might include required
standards, implementation languages, and resource limits.
● An interface requirement specifies an external item with which a
system must interact, or constraints on formats or other factors
used within such an interaction.
● A physical requirement specifies a physical constraint imposed on
the hardware used to house the system -- shape, size, or weight,
for example.
Realizing Requirements
From the descriptions above, we can easily see that some functional
requirements, and most requirements in the other FURPS+ categories, are
architecturally significant. Now let's look at how we might classify the
seemingly unrelated architectural requirements we listed earlier. Using the
FURPS+ classification we can see that:
● "The product will be localized (support multiple human languages)"
is a supportability requirement.
● "The persistence will be handled by a relational database" is a
design requirement.
● "The database will be Oracle 8i" is an implementation requirement.
● "The system will run seven days a week, twenty-four hours per day"
is a reliability requirement.
● "An online help system is required" is a functional requirement.
● "All presentation logic will be written in Visual Basic" is an
implementation requirement.
Knowing how such requirements are realized will help us ask the right
questions of our stakeholders. There is also value in understanding the
relationships between categories of requirement that, at first glance,
appear very disparate. Considering architectural mechanisms can assist us
on both counts.
Architectural Mechanisms
In simple terms, an architectural mechanism represents a common
solution to a frequently encountered problem. Architectural mechanisms
are often used to realize architectural requirements. Table 2 shows three
categories of architectural mechanisms and shows how architectural
mechanisms are expressed in each of these categories.
Table 2: Three Categories of Architectural Mechanisms
Analysis Mechanism Design
Mechanism
Implementation
Mechanism
Persistence
RDBMS
Oracle
Ingres
OODBMS ObjectStore
Communication
Object request
broker
Orbix
VisiBroker
Message queue MSMQ
MQSeries
An analysis mechanism represents an implementation-independent
solution. Table 2 shows two analysis mechanisms: persistence and
communication. For more examples of analysis mechanisms, see the
Analysis Mechanism Summary in Appendix A.
A design mechanism is a refinement of an analysis mechanism. It assumes
some details of the implementation environment but is not tied to a
specific implementation. In our example, the communication analysis
mechanism may be realized as a design mechanism such as an object
request broker or a message queue.
Finally, an implementation mechanism is a refinement of a design
mechanism, and specifies the exact implementation of the mechanism. In
our example, an object request broker may be implemented using either
Orbix or VisiBroker.
Figure 1 summarizes the relationship between requirements and
mechanisms, showing refinements of the FURPS requirements, design
requirements and implementation requirements as well as architectural
mechanisms at different levels of refinement.
Figure 1: Relationship Between Requirements and Mechanisms
The Challenge of Gathering Architectural Requirements

Before we discuss a systematic approach to gathering architectural
requirements, it is worth noting why such an approach is needed. In
essence, this is because many of the FURPS+ requirements we mentioned
earlier are relevant in a system-wide context and help drive the design of
the foundations (i.e., the architecture) of the system we're building. In
fact, on some projects, architectural requirements can be significantly
more important than their domain-specific counterparts. If you were
designing a life-support machine, for example, then availability ("up time")
would be pretty high on your list.
So why is it that architectural requirements are often overlooked? Because
they are difficult to gather -- and that's why being "systematic" about how
these requirements are gathered can make a real difference.
Gathering architectural requirements means venturing into uncharted
territory (in contrast to gathering more domain-specific requirements) for
a number of reasons:
● In most (although not all) systems, from an end-user perspective,
domain-specific requirements are more visible than their
architectural counterparts. Consequently, emphasis is placed on
gathering these domain-specific requirements because they are
perceived as the most valuable.
● Stakeholders are not usually familiar with the majority of
architectural requirements. Although they are comfortable with
specifying domain-specific features such as "Order Processing" and
"Stock Control," they are less familiar with "Reliability" and
"Usability," and think of them as technical issues that lie outside
their area of concern.
● Systematic techniques for gathering architectural requirements are
generally less well known than techniques for gathering domainspecific requirements.
Using a systematic approach can help overcome these difficulties, as we
shall see below.
An Approach for Gathering Architectural
Requirements
The approach to gathering architectural requirements we will explore is
simple:
1. Maintain a complete list of architectural requirements (regardless of
whether all items are relevant to a particular project). See Appendix
B: Architectural Requirements for a sample list.
2. For each architectural requirement, formulate one or more
questions that can help in the specification process. Make sure all
the system's stakeholders can understand these questions.
3. Assist stakeholders by showing them the potential impact of
answering a question one way or the other.
4. Capture the responses from your stakeholders to each of the
questions.
5. Assist the architect by ensuring that the stakeholders -- in addition
to answering these questions -- assign a priority or weighting to
each architectural requirement. This weighting will allow the
architect to make tradeoffs between requirements.
It is worth noting that this approach is possible because, at a high level,
the set of architectural requirements that must be considered is finite. You
can also apply this approach to requirements gathering within particular
problem domains that also have finite, well-defined, sets of considerations.
For a financial system, for example, there would be an imperative to pose
certain finance-related questions.
The Architectural Requirements Questionnaire
This approach is best represented in the form of a simple table provided to
stakeholders as an Architectural Requirements Questionnaire. Table 3
shows a portion of such a questionnaire and includes example answers.
For a complete Architectural Requirements Questionnaire template, see
Appendix C.
Table 3: Portion of an Architectural Requirements Questionnaire
Requirement Questions Impact Answers Priority
Licensing Will the system,
or parts of the
system, be
licensed?
Are there any
constraints on
the mechanism
used to provide
licensing
capability?
The greater the
sophistication of
the licensing
mechanism, the
longer the time
to market, and
the greater the
long-term
maintenance
cost.
The stock
control module
will be
marketed as a
separate
component of
the system and
will require
licensing. The
FlexLM tool is
used
throughout our
organization to
provide
licensing
capability.
Medium
Availability Are there any
requirements
regarding system
"up time"? This
may be specified
in terms of Mean
Time Between
Failures (MTBF).
The higher the
availability, the
longer the time
to market.
Availability is a
key product
feature. The
product must
have an MTBF
of 60 days.
High
Platform
support
What platforms
must the system
support?
Development for
a single platform
shortens the
time to market.
It also allows
closer integration
with platform
features.
Development for
multiple
platforms
lengthens the
time to market.
Close integration
with platform
features is
lessened,
increasing the
maintenance of
the system.
The product
will be released
on the
following UNIX
platforms:
Sun Solaris
IBM AIX
HPUX
High
Note that this questionnaire is used in the Elicit Stakeholder Requests
activity in the Rational Unified Process (RUP). Once completed, the
questionnaire is then used in the definition of some of the most important
artifacts used in the development process, including the Use-Case Model
and Supplementary Specification (which together provide a formal
specification of system requirements).
Rational RequisitePro® can be of great help in relation to the
questionnaire:
● It allows you to create multiple "views" of the questionnaire. This is
particularly valuable if you are interviewing different stakeholders
because you can filter by role. If you are interviewing a marketing
person, for example, you might want his or her responses to a
certain subset of questions but not to complex technical issues.
Rational RequisitePro allows you to assign a "role" attribute to each
question, which makes information gathering more efficient.
● It gives you traceability between architectural stakeholder requests
and both use-case requirements and supplementary requirements.
You can specify this traceability through links, and RequisitePro
provides traceabilty matrices to help you visualize these links.
Avoiding Common Pitfalls
When gathering any requirements -- not just architectural requirements --
there are a number of potential pitfalls. This section discusses these
pitfalls and provides suggestions for avoiding them.
The "Shopping Cart" Mentality. The technique described in this article
has been used on more than twenty projects to date, and every single one
of these projects has suffered from stakeholders' false impression that
specifying requirements is like filling up a shopping cart. In the absence of
any other criteria, a requirements gathering effort can amount to a futile
exchange along the following lines:
Analyst: Does the product need to be localized?
Stakeholder: That sounds good. We should plan to address foreign
markets.
Analyst: And what about security?
Stakeholder: Oh yes, the product should be secure.
Analyst: Tell me about your reliability expectations.
Stakeholder: Definitely twenty-four by seven -- no down time. That's
what we need to beat our competitors.
And so on. If you could offer your stakeholders a solution that solved the
worldwide shortage of dilithium crystals3, they'd want it. But every desired
requirement comes at a price; stakeholders can't just put everything they
want into a shopping cart at no cost. Be careful not to fall into the trap of
presenting them with the equivalent of a shopping list from which they
pick and choose.
The trick is to ensure that your stakeholders understand the cost of their
purchases, which is why an impact statement is associated with each
question in the questionnaire.
The "This Is Too Technical for Me" Attitude. Some stakeholders may
dismiss the Architectural Requirements Questionnaire as a technical
document whose content lies outside their area of concern. Often, the
reason for this perception is that the questions don't discuss their familiar
domain concepts, so they treat the document as less important than
techniques (such as use-case modeling) for capturing more visible, domainspecific requirements.
Once again, it's important to ensure that your stakeholders understand the
value of taking time to answer questions your questionnaire poses. It's
often easiest to demonstrate this value by giving examples of problems
that arise in the absence of a questionnaire!
The "All Requirements Are Equal" Fallacy. Another common pitfall
stems from giving all requirements the same priority. Without exception,
projects that fall into this trap classify all requirements as high priority.
Architectural requirements must be prioritized to indicate to the architect --
or anyone else -- which are the most important requirements for the
finished system. No design tradeoffs can be made if all requirements are
assigned the same priority. If you start to get bogged down when
prioritizing requirements, try considering them two at a time. The most
important requirements should naturally "bubble up" to the top of the list.
The "Park It in the Lot" Problem. In some organizations, stakeholders
dutifully collect requirements because an analyst told them to and
prioritize them (again, because an analyst told them to). And then, for
some reason, these requirements are then placed "on the shelf," never to
be used again. It's critical to ensure that your stakeholders understand the
value of capturing architectural requirements and that these requirements
are applied throughout the development of the system.
The "Requirements That Can't Be Measured" Syndrome. This can be
a pitfall for both domain-specific and architectural requirements. It's
important to ensure that all stated requirements are both unambiguous
and measurable. "The system will have a state-of-the-art interface," for
example, does not meet these criteria, because the definition of state-ofthe-art is highly subjective.
The "Not Enough Time" Complaint. Specifying architectural
requirements is a complex task that can't be done quickly. If stakeholders
balk at scheduling adequate time for the activity or grow impatient during
the process, remind them how important these requirements are in
building a foundation for the system, and don't allow them to short-circuit
your efforts.
The "Lack of Ownership" Problem. It is critical for the system analyst
and software architect to work collaboratively to create the Architectural
Requirements Questionnaire, and for the analyst to fully understand the
content. After all, the analyst will be gathering the requirements. If he or
she conveys the impression that the questionnaire is too technical to
comprehend and cannot provide clarification when necessary, that will
only reinforce stakeholders' misperceptions that the questionnaire is of
little use.
The "All Stakeholders Are Alike" Misconception. Many different
stakeholders have input during the requirements gathering process, and
you need to address the right questions to the right people. For example,
product management is probably the group to ask about specifying the
ability to license elements of the system, but requirements for system
usability are best specified by end users. Before you talk with
stakeholders, take the time to identify which group is responsible for
answering which questions.
The "Too General" Tendency. The Architectural Requirements
Questionnaire should be treated as an elicitation technique similar to
interviewing, brainstorming, and so on. The only difference between this
technique and others is that the primary focus is on capturing architectural
requirements for the system. Architectural requirements are often
specified at a very general level. For example, a requirement might state
that the response time of any transaction is less than three seconds. It's
likely, however, that although response times for specific transactions
must conform to this particular requirement, some transactions will take
significantly longer. If you don't make requirements as specific as possible,
then elements of your system are likely to be over-engineered, to comply
with architectural requirements that may not apply. Once again, the RUP
is helpful here. It provides three possible locations for architectural
requirements, which reflect three different levels of specificity, as shown in
Table 4.
Table 4: Levels of Specificity and RUP Locations for Architectural Requirements
Relates to: Example
Location in a RUP
Artifact
A particular
event flow within
a use case (most
specific)
If, in the basic flow, the
plane undercarriage fails
to engage, then an
alarm will be sent to the
central monitoring
station in less than one
second.
"Flow of events" section in
a use-case specification.
An entire use
case
Any order that is
processed must scale to
support more than
10,000 items.
"Special requirements"
section in a use-case
specification.
The entire
system (most
general)
Due to the nature of our
target markets, the
system must be
deployed in English,
French, Chinese, and
Arabic.
Supplementary
specification.
Where to Go from Here
As we've seen, capturing architecturally significant requirements is difficult
and fraught with pitfalls. But help is available. Use a tried and true
classification scheme for architectural requirements and an elicitation
technique to ensure that these requirements are not overlooked. Use the
appendices in this article, which contain a Sample Architectural
Requirements Questionnaire, and summaries of architectural analysis
mechanisms, and architectural requirements.
You can also take advantage of the best practices and workflow
capabilities built into the Rational Unified Process and Rational
RequisitePro. These tools are based on the experiences of many software
professionals just like yourself who have been down the same challenging
path, so using them will get you off to a great start and sustain you on the
journey, too.
Acknowledgments
I'd like to thank a number of my colleagues at Rational for reviewing the
content of this article and providing valuable feedback, including Dave
Brown, Maria Ericsson, Kelli Houston, Volker Kopetzky, and Wojtek
Kozaczynski.
Appendices
Appendix A: Analysis Mechanisms
Appendix B: Architectural Requirements
Appendix C: Sample Architectural Requirements Questionnaire
Notes
1 Much of the advice in this article can be applied to requirements
gathering in general.
2 As presented in Robert Grady, Practical Software Metrics for Project
Management and Process Improvement. Prentice-Hall, 1992.
3 As every Trekkie knows, dilithium can work in conjunction with
deuterium to power both warp drives and weaponry. Unfortunately, it is
native only to planets heretofore unvisited by Earthlings.
For more information on the products or services discussed in this
article, please click here and follow the instructions provided.
Thank you!
Copyright Rational Software 2001 | Privacy/Legal Information
View publication stats

Supplementary Specification:
FURPS+
Artifacts
12
Supplementary Specification
• Captures
• Requirements not captured as/in User Scenarios (US/UC)
• Non-Functional requirements
• Some functional requirements that are not an Elementary Business Process
• Organize requirements by categories
• Adopt FURPS+ model
13
Recall lectures
FURPS+
• FURPS+ is a classification system
14
Category (EN) Categoria (PT)
Functionality Funcionalidade
Usability Usabilidade
Reliability Confiabilidade
Performance Desempenho
Supportability Suporte
+: design, implementation,
interface and physical constraints
+: restrições de desenho,
implementação, interface e físicas
Quality
Attributes Non-Functional
Requirements
Recall lectures
FURPS+
• Functionality
• Specifies functionalities that are common across several US/UC and are therefore not
captured in the user scenarios
• Usability
• Evaluates the user interface
• Reliability
• Refers to the integrity, compliance and interoperability of the software
• Performance
• Evaluates the performance of the software (i.e. running times, usage, availability)
• Supportability
• Regards testability, maintainability, compatibility, configurability, installability, scalability …
• Others (+)
• Specifies design, implementation, interface and physical constraints